Nearly half the Sterkels’ tax bill — and the reason it had shot up so quickly — went to Thompson Crossing Metropolitan District No. 4, the quasi-government metro district that controls the area where they purchased. The district’s tax levy was the only one to increase each year they were in their home.
The newspaper also found instances where a district’s runaway debt stalled only after residents wrestled control of the boards — the Fossil Ridge Metropolitan District in Jefferson County among them — causing developers to resign in the face of recall petitions before they could approve additional funding.
The watershed moment, Matise said, was the success of the Highlands Ranch Metropolitan District, which was organized in the 1980s and became the largest unincorporated community in the U.S. The Highlands Ranch service plan was eventually amended to allow it to provide most of the services and infrastructure of a municipality.
For example, the developer-controlled Big Dry Creek Metropolitan District in Adams County in 2017 issued a pair of senior bonds totaling $11 million at about 6% interest to cover the costs of building its infrastructure. They were primarily sold to institutional investors and are to be paid over 30 years.
It happened at the Banning Lewis Metropolitan District No. 4 in Colorado Springs last year. The district, the projected site of 3,581 homes, issued more than $9.4 million in bonds to start development. Records show its developer, Oakwood Homes, which also controls the metro district board that issued the bonds, has an interest in $1.9 million of junior bonds with an expected payday of more than $10 million.
The same is true at Amber Creek Metropolitan District in Thornton, which issued $17 million in senior bonds in 2017 to investors at varying interest rates up to 7.75%. Another $1.7 million in junior bonds went to its developer/builder, Lennar Colorado, at 10.7% interest with an expected payday of $25.8 million over 30 years, bond documents show. The effective interest rate: 39.6%.